The Case of the Colorblind Painter
Early in March 1986 I received the following letter:
I am a rather successful artist just past 65 years of age. On January 2nd of this year I was
driving my car and was hit by a small truck on the passenger side of my vehicle. When
visiting the emergency room of a local hospital, I was told I had a concussion. While
taking an eye examination, it was discovered that I was unable to distinguish letters or
colors. The letters appeared to be Greek letters. My vision was such that everything
appeared to me as viewing a black and white television screen. Within days, I could
distinguish letters and my vision became that of an eagle—I can see a worm wriggling a
block away. The sharpness of focus is incredible. BUT—I AM ABSOLUTELY COLOR
BLIND. I have visited ophthalmologists who know nothing about this colorblind business. I
have visited neurologists, to no avail. Under hypnosis I still can’t distinguish colors. I have
been involved in all kinds of tests. You name it. My brown dog is dark grey. Tomato juice
is black. Color TV is a hodge-podge.…
Had I ever encountered such a problem before, the writer continued;
could I explain what was happening to him—and could I help?
This seemed an extraordinary letter. Colorblindness, as ordinarily
understood, is something one is born with—a difficulty distinguishing
red and green, or other colors, or (extremely rarely) an inability to see
any colors at all, due to defects in the color-responding cells, the cones,
of the retina. But clearly this was not the case with my correspondent,
Jonathan I. He had seen normally all his life, had been born with a full
complement of cones in his retinas. He had become colorblind, after
sixty-five years of seeing colors normally—totally colorblind, as if
“viewing a black and white television screen.” The suddenness of the
event was incompatible with any of the slow deteriorations that can
befall the retinal cone cells and suggested instead a mishap at a muchhigher level, in those parts of the brain specialized for the perception of
color.
Total colorblindness caused by brain damage, so-called cerebral
achromatopsia, though described more than three centuries ago, remains
a rare and important condition. It has intrigued neurologists because,
like all neural dissolutions and destructions, it can reveal to us the
mechanisms of neural construction—specifically, here, how the brain
“sees” (or makes) color. Doubly intriguing is its occurrence in an artist, a
painter for whom color has been of primary importance, and who can
directly paint as well as describe what has befallen him, and thus convey
the full strangeness, distress, and reality of the condition.
Color is not a trivial subject but one that has compelled, for hundreds
of years, a passionate curiosity in the greatest artists, philosophers, and
natural scientists. The young Spinoza wrote his first treatise on the
rainbow; the young Newton’s most joyous discovery was the
composition of white light; Goethe’s great color work, like Newton’s,
started with a prism; Schopenhauer, Young, Helmholtz, and Maxwell, in
the last century, were all tantalized by the problem of color; and
Wittgenstein’s last work was his Remarks on Colour. And yet most of us,
most of the time, overlook its great mystery. Through such a case as Mr.
I.’s we can trace not only the underlying cerebral mechanisms or
physiology but the phenomenology of color and the depth of its
resonance and meaning for the individual.
On getting Mr. I.’s letter, I contacted my good friend and colleague
Robert Wasserman, an ophthalmologist, feeling that together we needed
to explore Mr. I.’s complex situation and, if we could, help him. We first
saw him in April 1986. He was a tall, gaunt man, with a sharp,
intelligent face. Although obviously depressed by his condition, he soon
warmed to us and began talking with animation and humor. He
constantly smoked as he talked; his fingers, restless, were stained with
nicotine. He described a very active and productive life as an artist, from
his early days with Georgia O’Keeffe in New Mexico, to painting
backdrops in Hollywood during the 1940s, to working as an Abstract
Expressionist in New York during the 1950s and later as an art director
and a commercial artist.We learned that his accident had been accompanied by a transient
amnesia. He had been able, evidently, to give a clear account of himself
and his accident to the police at the time it happened, late on the
afternoon of January 2, but then, because of a steadily mounting
headache, he went home. He complained to his wife of having a
headache and feeling confused, but made no mention of the accident. He
then fell into a long, almost stuporous sleep. It was only the next
morning, when his wife saw the side of the car stove in, that she asked
him what had happened. When she got no clear answer (“I don’t know.
Maybe somebody backed into it”) she knew that something serious must
have happened.
Mr. I. then drove off to his studio and found on his desk a carbon copy
of the police accident report. He had had an accident, but somehow,
bizarrely, had lost his memory of it. Perhaps the report would jolt his
memory. But lifting it up, he could make nothing of it. He saw print of
different sizes and types, all clearly in focus, but it looked like “Greek”
or “Hebrew” to him.1 A magnifying glass did not help; it simply became
large “Greek” or “Hebrew.” (This alexia, or inability to read, lasted for
five days, but then disappeared.)
Feeling now that he must have suffered a stroke or some sort of brain
damage from the accident, Jonathan I. phoned his doctor, who arranged
for him to be tested at a local hospital. Although, as his original letter
indicates, difficulties in distinguishing colors were detected at this time,
in addition to his inability to read, he had no subjective sense of the
alteration of colors until the next day.
That day he decided to go to work again. It seemed to him as if he
were driving in a fog, even though he knew it to be a bright and sunny
morning. Everything seemed misty, bleached, greyish, indistinct. He was
flagged down by the police close to his studio: he had gone through two
red lights, they said. Did he realize this? No, he said, he was not aware
of having passed through any red lights. They asked him to get out of
the car. Finding him sober, but apparently bewildered and ill, they gave
him a ticket and suggested he seek medical advice.
Mr. I. arrived at his studio with relief, expecting that the horrible mist
would be gone, that everything would be clear again. But as soon as he
entered, he found his entire studio, which was hung with brilliantly
colored paintings, now utterly grey and void of color. His canvases, theabstract color paintings he was known for, were now greyish or black
and white. His paintings—once rich with associations, feelings, meanings
—now looked unfamiliar and meaningless to him. At this point the
magnitude of his loss overwhelmed him. He had spent his life as a
painter; now even his art was without meaning, and he could no longer
imagine how to go on.
The weeks that followed were very difficult. “You might think,” Mr. I.
said, “loss of color vision, what’s the big deal? Some of my friends said
this, my wife sometimes thought this, but to me, at least, it was awful,
disgusting.” He knew the colors of everything, with an extraordinary
exactness (he could give not only the names but the numbers of colors as
these were listed in a Pantone chart of hues he had used for many
years). He could identify the green of van Gogh’s billiard table in this
way unhesitatingly. He knew all the colors in his favorite paintings, but
could no longer see them, either when he looked or in his mind’s eye.
Perhaps he knew them, now, only by verbal memory.
It was not just that colors were missing, but that what he did see had a
distasteful, “dirty” look, the whites glaring, yet discolored and off-white,
the blacks cavernous—everything wrong, unnatural, stained, and
impure.2
Mr. I. could hardly bear the changed appearances of people (“like
animated grey statues”) any more than he could bear his own
appearance in the mirror: he shunned social intercourse and found
sexual intercourse impossible. He saw people’s flesh, his wife’s flesh, his
own flesh, as an abhorrent grey; “flesh-colored” now appeared “rat-
colored” to him. This was so even when he closed his eyes, for his vivid
visual imagery was preserved but was now without color as well.
The “wrongness” of everything was disturbing, even disgusting, and
applied to every circumstance of daily life. He found foods disgusting
due to their greyish, dead appearance and had to close his eyes to eat.
But this did not help very much, for the mental image of a tomato was as
black as its appearance. Thus, unable to rectify even the inner image, the
idea, of various foods, he turned increasingly to black and white foods—
to black olives and white rice, black coffee and yogurt. These at least
appeared relatively normal, whereas most foods, normally colored, now
appeared horribly abnormal. His own brown dog looked so strange to
him now that he even considered getting a Dalmatian.He encountered difficulties and distresses of every sort, from the
confusion of red and green traffic lights (which he could now distinguish
only by position) to an inability to choose his clothes. (His wife had to
pick them out, and this dependency he found hard to bear; later, he had
everything classified in his drawers and closet—grey socks here, yellow
there, ties labeled, jackets and suits categorized, to prevent otherwise
glaring incongruities and confusions.) Fixed and ritualistic practices and
positions had to be adopted at the table; otherwise he might mistake the
mustard for the mayonnaise, or, if he could bring himself to use the
blackish stuff, ketchup for jam.3
As the months went by, he particularly missed the brilliant colors of
spring—he had always loved flowers, but now he could only distinguish
them by shape or smell. The blue jays were brilliant no longer; their
blue, curiously, was now seen as pale grey. He could no longer see the
clouds in the sky, their whiteness, or off-whiteness as he saw them,
being scarcely distinguishable from the azure, which seemed bleached to
a pale grey. Red and green peppers were also indistinguishable, but this
was because both appeared black. Yellows and blues, to him, were
almost white.4
Mr. I. also seemed to experience an excessive tonal contrast, with loss
of delicate tonal gradations, especially in direct sunlight or harsh
artificial light; he made a comparison here with the effects of sodium
lighting, which at once removes color and tonal delicacy, and with
certain black-and-white films—“like Tri-X pushed for speed”—which
produce a harsh, contrasty effect. Sometimes objects stood out with
inordinate contrast and sharpness, like silhouettes. But if the contrast
was normal, or low, they might disappear from sight altogether.
Thus, though his brown dog would stand out sharply in silhouette
against a light road, it might get lost to sight when it moved into soft,
dappled undergrowth. People’s figures might be visible and recognizable
half a mile off (as he himself said in his original letter, and many times
later, his vision had become much sharper, “that of an eagle”), but faces
would often be unidentifiable until they were close. This seemed a
matter of lost color and tonal contrast, rather than a defect in
recognition, an agnosia. A major problem occurred when he drove, in
that he tended to misinterpret shadows as cracks or ruts in the road and
would brake or swerve suddenly to avoid these.He found color television especially hard to bear: its images always
unpleasant, sometimes unintelligible. Black-and-white television, he
thought, was much easier to deal with; he felt his perception of black-
and-white images to be relatively normal, whereas something bizarre
and intolerable occurred whenever he looked at colored images. (When
we asked why he did not simply turn off the color, he said he thought
that the tonal values of “decolored” color TV seemed different, less
“normal,” than those of a “pure” black-and-white set.) But, as he now
explained, in distinction to his first letter, his world was not really like
black-and-white television or film—it would have been much easier to
live with had it been so. (He sometimes wished he could wear miniature
TV glasses.)
His despair of conveying what his world looked like, and the
uselessness of the usual black-and-white analogies, finally drove him,
some weeks later, to create an entire grey room, a grey universe, in his
studio, in which tables, chairs, and an elaborate dinner ready for serving
were all painted in a range of greys. The effect of this, in three
dimensions and in a different tonal scale from the “black and white” we
are all accustomed to, was indeed macabre, and wholly unlike that of a
black-and-white photograph. As Mr. I. pointed out, we accept black-and-
white photographs or films because they are representations of the world
—images that we can look at, or away from, when we want. But black
and white for him was a reality, all around him, 360 degrees, solid and
three-dimensional, twenty-four hours a day. The only way he could
express it, he felt, was to make a completely grey room for others to
experience—but of course, he pointed out, the observer himself would
have to be painted grey, so he would be part of the world, not just
observing it. More than this: the observer would have to lose, as he
himself had, the neural knowledge of color. It was, he said, like living in
a world “molded in lead.”Paintings done by Mr. I. shortly before his accident.Paintings done by Mr. I. shortly before his accident.A painting of flowers done four weeks after Mr. I.’s accident. The underlying outlines are clear, but camouflaged by a random
application of color.Mr. I. painted pieces of grey fruit to show us the “leaden” universe into which he had fallen.A test painting from Mary Collin’s Colour-Blindness (left), as reproduced by someone with red-green colorblindness, and by Mr. I.
(right).The sunset scene of which Mr. I. could see virtually nothing (–an effect simulated by a black-and-white photocopy of it.)A black-and-white painting done about two months after Mr. I.’s accident …… and a painting done two years later–Mr. I. at this time was experimenting with adding single colors, even though he could not
see them.Subsequently, he said neither “grey” nor “leaden” could begin to
convey what his world was actually like. It was not “grey” that he
experienced, he said, but perceptual qualities for which ordinary
experience, ordinary language, had no equivalent.
Mr. I. could no longer bear to go to museums and galleries or to see
colored reproductions of his favorite pictures. This was not just because
they were bereft of color, but because they looked intolerably wrong,
with washed-out or “unnatural” shades of grey (photographs in black
and white, on the other hand, were much more tolerable). This was
especially distressing when he knew the artists, and the perceptual
debasement of their work interfered with his sense of their identity—
this, indeed, was what he now felt was happening with himself.
He was depressed once by a rainbow, which he saw only as a colorless
semicircle in the sky. And he even felt his occasional migraines as
“dull”—previously they had involved brilliantly colored geometric
hallucinations, but now even these were devoid of color. He sometimes
tried to evoke color by pressing the globes of his eyes, but the flashes
and patterns elicited were equally lacking in color. He had often
dreamed in vivid color, especially when he dreamed of landscapes and
painting; now his dreams were washed-out and pale, or violent and
contrasty, lacking both color and delicate tonal gradations.
Music, curiously, was impaired for him too, because he had previously
had an extremely intense synesthesia, so that different tones had
immediately been translated into color, and he experienced all music
simultaneously as a rich tumult of inner colors. With the loss of his
ability to generate colors, he lost this ability as well—his internal “color-
organ” was out of action, and now he heard music with no visual
accompaniment; this, for him, was music with its essential chromatic
counterpart missing, music now radically impoverished.5
A certain mild pleasure came from looking at drawings; he had been a
fine draftsman in his earlier years. Could he not go back to drawing
again? This thought was slow to occur to him, and it only took hold after
being suggested repeatedly by others. His own first impulse was to paint
in color. He insisted that he still “knew” what colors to use, even though
he could no longer see them. He decided, as a first exercise, to paint
flowers, taking from his palette what tints seemed “tonally right.” Butthe pictures were unintelligible, a confusing welter of colors to normal
eyes. It was only when one of his artist friends took black-and-white
Polaroids of the paintings that they made sense. The contours were
accurate, but the colors were all wrong. “No one will get your
paintings,” one of his friends said, “unless they are as colorblind as you.”
“Stop pushing it,” said another. “You can’t use color now.” Mr. I.
reluctantly allowed all his colored paints to be put away. It’s only
temporary, he thought. I’ll be back to color soon.
These first weeks were a time of agitation, even desperation; he was
constantly hoping that he would wake up one fine morning and find the
world of color miraculously restored. This was a constant motif in his
dreams at the time, but the wish was never fulfilled, even in his dreams.
He would dream that he was about to see in color, but then he would
wake and find that nothing had changed. He constantly feared that
whatever had happened would happen again, this time depriving him of
all his sight completely. He thought he had probably had a stroke,
caused by (or perhaps causing) his accident in the car, and feared that
there could be another stroke at any moment. In addition to this medical
fear, there was a deeper bewilderment and fear that he found almost
impossible to articulate, and it was this that had come to a head in his
month of attempted color painting, his month of insisting that he still
“knew” color. It had gradually come upon him, during this time, that it
was not merely color perception and color imagery that he lacked, but
something deeper and difficult to define. He knew all about color,
externally, intellectually, but he had lost the remembrance, the inner
knowledge, of it that had been part of his very being. He had had a
lifetime of experience in color, but now this was only a historical fact,
not something he could access and feel directly. It was as if his past, his
chromatic past, had been taken away, as if the brain’s knowledge of
color had been totally excised, leaving no trace, no inner evidence, of its
existence behind.6
By the beginning of February, some of his agitation was calming
down; he had started to accept, not merely intellectually, but at a deeper
level, too, that he was indeed totally colorblind and might possibly
remain so. His initial sense of helplessness started to give way to a senseof resolution—he would paint in black and white, if he could not paint
in color; he would try to live in a black-and-white world as fully as he
could. This resolution was strengthened by a singular experience, about
five weeks after his accident, as he was driving to the studio one
morning. He saw the sunrise over the highway, the blazing reds all
turned into black: “The sun rose like a bomb, like some enormous
nuclear explosion,” he said later. “Had anyone ever seen a sunrise in this
way before?”
Inspired by the sunrise, he started painting again—he started, indeed,
with a black-and-white painting that he called Nuclear Sunrise, and then
went on to the abstracts he favored, but now painting in black and white
only. The fear of blindness continued to haunt him but, creatively
transmuted, shaped the first “real” paintings he did after his color
experiments. Black-and-white paintings he now found he could do, and
do very well. He found his only solace working in the studio, and he
worked fifteen, even eighteen, hours a day. This meant for him a kind of
artistic survival: “I felt if I couldn’t go on painting,” he said later, “I
wouldn’t want to go on at all.”
His first black-and-white paintings, done in February and March,
gave a feeling of violent forces—rage, fear, despair, excitement—but
these were held in control, attesting to the powers of artistry that could
disclose, and yet contain, such intensity of feeling. In these two months
he produced dozens of paintings, marked by a singular style, a character
he had never shown before. In many of these paintings, there was an
extraordinary shattered, kaleidoscopic surface, with abstract shapes
suggestive of faces—averted, shadowed, sorrowing, raging—and
dismembered body parts, faceted and held in frames and boxes. They
had, compared with his previous work, a labyrinthine complexity, and
an obsessed, haunted quality—they seemed to exhibit, in symbolic form,
the predicament he was in.
Starting in May—it was fascinating to watch—he moved from these
powerful but rather terrifying and alien paintings toward themes, living
themes, he had not touched in thirty years, back to representational
paintings of dancers and racehorses. These paintings, even though still in
black and white, were full of movement, vitality, and sensuousness; andthey went with a change in his personal life—a lessening of his
withdrawal and the beginnings of a renewed social and sexual life, a
lessening of his fears and depression, and a turning back to life.
At this time, too, he turned to sculpture, which he had never done
before. He seemed to be turning to all the visual modes that still
remained to him—form, contour, movement, depth—and exploring them
with heightened intensity. He also started painting portraits, although he
found that he could not work from life, but only from black-and-white
photographs, fortified by his knowledge of and feeling for each subject.
Life was tolerable only in the studio, for here he could reconceive the
world in powerful, stark forms. But outside, in real life, he found the
world alien, empty, dead, and grey.
This was the story Bob Wasserman and I got from Mr. I.—a story of
an abrupt and total breakdown of color vision, and his attempts to live
in a black-and-white world. I had never been given such a history before,
I had never met anyone with total colorblindness before, and I had no
idea what had happened to him—nor whether his condition could be
reversed or improved.
The first thing was to define his impairments more precisely with
various tests, some quite informal, making use of everyday objects or
pictures, whatever came to hand. For instance, we first asked Mr. I.
about a shelf of notebooks—blue, red, and black—by my desk. He
instantly picked out the blue ones (a bright medium blue to normal eyes)
—“they’re pale.” The red and the black were indistinguishable—both,
for him, were “dead black.”
We then gave him a large mass of yarns, containing thirty-three
separate colors, and asked him to sort these: he said he could not sort
them by color, but only by grey-scale tonal values. He then, rapidly and
easily, separated the yarns into four strange, chromatically random piles,
which he characterized as 0–25 percent, 25–50 percent, 50–75 percent,
and 75–100 percent on a grey-tone scale (though nothing looked to him
purely white, and even white yarn looked slightly “dingy” or “dirty”).
We ourselves could not confirm the accuracy of this, because our color
vision interfered with our ability to visualize a grey scale, just as
normally sighted viewers had been unable to perceive the tonal sense ofhis confusingly polychromatic flower paintings. But a black-and-white
photograph and a black-and-white video camera confirmed that Mr. I.
had indeed accurately divided the colored yarns in a grey scale that
basically coincided with their own mechanical reading. There was,
perhaps, a certain crudeness in his categories, but this went with the
sense of sharp contrast, the paucity of tonal gradations, that he had
complained of. Indeed, when shown an artist’s grey scale of perhaps a
dozen gradations from black to white, Mr. I. could distinguish only three
or four categories of tone.7
We also showed him the classic Ishihara color-dot plates, in which
configurations of numerals in subtly differentiated colors may stand out
clearly for the normally sighted, but not for those with various types of
colorblindness. Mr. I. was unable to see any of these figures (although he
was able to see certain plates that are visible to the colorblind but not to
normally sighted people, and thus designed to catch pretended or
hysterical colorblindness).8
We happened to have a postcard that could have been designed for
testing achromatopes—a postcard of a coastal scene, with fishermen on a
jetty silhouetted against a dark red sunset sky. Mr. I. was totally unable
to see the fishermen or the jetty, and saw only the half-engulfed
hemisphere of the setting sun.
Though such problems arose when he was shown colored pictures, Mr.
I. had no difficulty describing black-and-white photographs or
reproductions accurately; he had no difficulty recognizing forms. His
imagery and memory of objects and pictures shown to him were indeed
exceptionally vivid and accurate, though always colorless. Thus, after
being given a classic test picture of a colored boat, he looked intensely,
looked away, and then rapidly reproduced it in black and white paint.
When asked the colors of familiar objects, he had no difficulties in color
association or color naming. (Patients with color anomia, for instance,
can match colors perfectly but have lost the names of colors, and might
speak, uncertainly, of a banana being “blue.” A patient with a color
agnosia, by contrast, could also match colors, but would evince no
surprise if given a blue banana. Mr. I., however, had neither of these
problems.)9 Nor did he (now) have any difficulties reading. Testing up to
this point, and a general neurological examination, thus confirmed Mr.
I.’s total achromatopsia.We could say to him at this point that his problem was real—that he
had a true achromatopsia and not a hysteria. He took this, we thought,
with mixed feelings: he had half hoped it might be merely a hysteria,
and as such potentially reversible. But the notion of something
psychological had also distressed him and made him feel that his
problem was “not real” (indeed, several doctors had hinted at this). Our
testing, in a sense, legitimized his condition, but deepened his fear about
brain damage and the prognosis for recovery.
Although it seemed that he had an achromatopsia of cerebral origin,
we could not help wondering whether a lifetime of heavy smoking could
have played a part; nicotine can cause a dimming of vision (an
amblyopia) and sometimes an achromatopsia—but this is predominantly
due to its effects on the cells of the retina. But the major problem was
clearly cerebral: Mr. I. could have sustained tiny areas of brain damage
as a result of his concussion; he could have had a small stroke either
following, or conceivably precipitating, the accident.
The history of our knowledge about the brain’s ability to represent
color has followed a complex and zigzag course. Newton, in his famous
prism experiment in 1666, showed that white light was composite—
could be decomposed into, and recomposed by, all the colors of the
spectrum. The rays that were bent most (“the most refrangible”) were
seen as violet, the least refrangible as red, with the rest of the spectrum
in between. The colors of objects, Newton thought, were determined by
the “copiousness” with which they reflected particular rays to the eye.
Thomas Young, in 1802, feeling that there was no need to have an
infinity of different receptors in the eye, each tuned to a different
wavelength (artists, after all, could create almost any color they wanted
by using a very limited palette of paints) postulated that three types of
receptors would be enough.10 Young’s brilliant idea, thrown off casually
in the course of a lecture, was forgotten, or lay dormant, for fifty years,
until Hermann von Helmholtz, in the course of his own investigation of
vision, resurrected it and gave it a new precision, so that we now speak
of the Young-Helmholtz hypothesis. For Helmholtz, as for Young, color
was a direct expression of the wavelengths of light absorbed by each
receptor, the nervous system just translating one into the other: “Redlight stimulates the red-sensitive fibres strongly, and the other two
weakly, giving the sensation red.”11
In 1884, Hermann Wilbrand, seeing in his neurological practice
patients with a range of visual losses—in some predominantly the loss of
visual field, in others predominantly of color perception, and in still
others predominantly of form perception—suggested that there must be
separate visual centers in the primary visual cortex for “light
impressions,” “color impressions,” and “form impressions,” though he
had no anatomical evidence for this. That achromatopsia (and even
hemi-achromatopsia) could indeed arise from damage to specific parts of
the brain was first confirmed, four years later, by a Swiss
ophthalmologist, Louis Verrey. He described a sixty-year-old woman
who, in consequence of a stroke affecting the occipital lobe of her left
hemisphere, now saw everything in the right half of her visual field in
shades of grey (the left half remained normally colored). The
opportunity to examine his patient’s brain after her death showed
damage confined to a small portion (the fusiform and lingual gyri) of the
visual cortex—it was here, Verrey concluded, that “the centre for
chromatic sense will be found.” That such a center might exist, that any
part of the cortex might be specialized for the perception or
representation of color, was immediately contested and continued to be
contested for almost a century. The grounds of this contention go very
deep, as deep as the philosophy of neurology itself.
Locke, in the seventeenth century, had held to a “sensationalist”
philosophy (which paralleled Newton’s physicalist one): our senses are
measuring instruments, recording the external world for us in terms of
sensation. Hearing, seeing, all sensation, he took to be wholly passive
and receptive. Neurologists in the late nineteenth century were quick to
accept this philosophy and to embed it in a speculative anatomy of the
brain. Visual perception was equated with “sense-data” or “impressions”
transmitted from the retina to the primary visual area of the brain, in an
exact,
point-to-point
correspondence—and
there
experienced,
subjectively, as an image of the visual world. Color, it was presumed,
was an integral part of this image. There was no room, anatomically, it
was thought, for a separate color center—or indeed, conceptually, for
the very idea of one. Thus when Verrey published his findings in 1888,
they flew in the face of accepted doctrine. His observations weredoubted, his testing criticized, his examination regarded as flawed—but
the real objection, behind these, was doctrinal in nature.
If there was no discrete color center, so the thinking went, there could
be no isolated achromatopsia either; thus Verrey’s case, and two similar
ones in the 1890s, were dismissed from neurological consciousness—and
cerebral achromatopsia, as a subject, all but disappeared for the next
seventy-five years.12 There was not to be another full case study until
1974.13
Mr. I. himself was actively curious about what was going on in his
brain. Though he now lived wholly in a world of lightnesses and
darknesses, he was very struck by how these changed in different
illuminations; red objects, for instance, which normally appeared black
to him, became lighter in the long rays of the evening sun, and this
allowed him to infer their redness. This phenomenon was very marked if
the quality of illumination suddenly changed, as, for example, when a
fluorescent light was turned on, which would cause an immediate
change in the brightnesses of objects around the room. Mr. I. commented
that he now found himself in an inconstant world, a world whose lights
and darks fluctuated with the wavelength of illumination, in striking
contrast to the relative stability, the constancy, of the color world he had
previously known.14
All of this, of course, is very difficult to explain in terms of classical
color theory—Newton’s notion of an invariant relationship between
wavelength and color, of a cell-to-cell transmission of wavelength
information from the retina to the brain, and of a direct conversion of
this information into color. Such a simple process—a neurological
analogy to the decomposition and recomposition of light through a
prism—could hardly account for the complexity of color perception in
real life.
This incompatibility between classical color theory and reality struck
Goethe in the late eighteenth century. Intensely aware of the
phenomenal reality of colored shadows and colored afterimages, of the
effects of contiguity and illumination on the appearance of colors, of
colored and other visual illusions, he felt that these must be the basis of
a color theory and declared as his credo, “Optical illusion is optical
truth!” Goethe was centrally concerned with the way we actually see
colors and light, the ways in which we create worlds, and illusions, incolor. This, he felt, was not explicable by Newton’s physics, but only by
some as-yet unknown rules of the brain. He was saying, in effect, “Visual
illusion is neurological truth.”
Goethe’s color theory, his Farbenlehre (which he regarded as the
equal of his entire poetic opus), was, by and large, dismissed by all his
contemporaries and has remained in a sort of limbo ever since, seen as
the whimsy, the pseudoscience, of a very great poet. But science itself
was not entirely insensitive to the “anomalies” that Goethe considered
central, and Helmholtz, indeed, gave admiring lectures on Goethe and
his science, on many occasions—the last in 1892. Helmholtz was very
conscious of “color constancy”—the way in which the colors of objects
are preserved, so that we can categorize them and always know what we
are looking at, despite great fluctuations in the wavelength of the light
illuminating them. The actual wavelengths reflected by an apple, for
instance, will vary considerably depending on the illumination, but we
consistently see it as red, nonetheless. This could not be, clearly, a mere
translation of wavelength into color. There had to be some way,
Helmholtz thought, of “discounting the illuminant”—and this he saw as
an “unconscious inference” or “an act of judgement” (though he did not
venture to suggest where such judgement might occur). Color constancy,
for him, was a special example of the way in which we achieve
perceptual constancy generally, make a stable perceptual world from a
chaotic sensory flux—a world that would not be possible if our
perceptions were merely passive reflections of the unpredictable and
inconstant input that bathes our receptors.
Helmholtz’s great contemporary, Clerk Maxwell, had also been
fascinated by the mystery of color vision from his student days. He
formalized the notions of primary colors and color mixing by the
invention of a color top (the colors of which fused, when it was spun, to
yield a sensation of grey), and a graphic representation with three axes,
a color triangle, which showed how any color could be created by
different mixtures of the three primary colors. These prepared the way
for his most spectacular demonstration, the demonstration in 1861 that
color photography was possible, despite the fact that photographic
emulsions were themselves black and white. He did this byphotographing a colored bow three times, through red, green, and violet
filters. Having obtained three “color-separation” images, as he called
them, he now brought these together by superimposing them upon a
screen, projecting each image through its corresponding filter (the image
taken through the red filter was projected with red light, and so on).
Suddenly, the bow burst forth in full color. Maxwell wondered if this
was how colors were perceived in the brain, by the addition of color-
separation images or their neural correlates, as in his magic-lantern
demonstrations.15
Maxwell himself was acutely aware of the drawback of this additive
process: color photography had no way of “discounting the illuminant,”
and its colors changed helplessly with changing wavelengths of light.
In 1957, ninety-odd years after Maxwell’s famous demonstration,
Edwin Land—not merely the inventor of the instant Land camera and
Polaroid, but an experimenter and theorizer of genius—provided a
photographic demonstration of color perception even more startling.
Unlike Maxwell, he made only two black-and-white images (using a
split-beam camera so they could be taken at the same time from the
same viewpoint, through the same lens) and superimposed these on a
screen with a double-lens projector. He used two filters to make the
images: one passing longer wavelengths (a red filter), the other passing
shorter wavelengths (a green filter). The first image was then projected
through a red filter, the second with ordinary white light, unfiltered.
One might expect that this would produce just an overall pale-pink
image, but something “impossible” happened instead. The photograph of
a young woman appeared instantly in full color—“blonde hair, pale blue
eyes, red coat, bluegreen collar, and strikingly natural flesh tones,” as
Land later described it. Where did these colors come from, how were
they made? They did not seem to be “in” the photographs or the
illuminants themselves. These demonstrations, overwhelming in their
simplicity and impact, were color “illusions” in Goethe’s sense, but
illusions that demonstrated a neurological truth—that colors are not “out
there” in the world, nor (as classical theory held) an automatic correlate
of wavelength, but, rather, are constructed by the brain.
These experiments hung, at first, like anomalies, conceptless, in
midair; they were inexplicable in terms of existing theory, but did not
yet point clearly to a new one. It seemed possible, moreover, that theviewer’s knowledge of appropriate colors might influence his perception
of such a scene. Land decided, therefore, to replace familiar images of
the natural world with entirely abstract, multicolored displays consisting
of geometric patches of colored paper, so that expectation could provide
no clues as to what colors should be seen. These abstract displays
vaguely resembled some of the paintings of Piet Mondrian, and Land
therefore terms them “color Mondrians.” Using the Mondrians, which
were illuminated by three projectors, using long-wave (red), middle-
wave (green), and short-wave (blue) filters, Land was able to prove that,
if a surface formed part of a complex multicolored scene, there was no
simple relationship between the wavelength of light reflected from a
surface and its perceived color.
If, moreover, a single patch of color (for example, one ordinarily seen
as green) was isolated from its surrounding colors, it would appear only
as white or pale grey, whatever illuminating beam was used. Thus the
green patch, Land showed, could not be regarded as inherently green,
but was, in part, given its greenness by its relation to the surrounding
areas of the Mondrian.
Whereas color for Newton, for classical theory, was something local
and absolute, given by the wavelength of light reflected from each point,
Land showed that its determination was neither local nor absolute, but
depended upon the surveying of a whole scene and a comparison of the
wavelength composition of the light reflected from each point with that
of the light reflected from its surround. There had to be a continuous
relating, a comparison of every part of the visual field with its own
surround, to arrive at that global synthesis—Helmholtz’s “act of
judgement.” Land felt that this computation or correlation followed
fixed, formal rules; and he was able to predict which colors would be
perceived by an observer under different conditions. He devised a “color
cube,” an algorithm, for this, in effect a model for the brain’s comparison
of the brightnesses, at different wavelengths, of all the parts of a
complex, multicolored surface. Whereas Maxwell’s color theory and
color triangle were based on the concept of color addition, Land’s model
was now one of comparison. He proposed that there were, in fact, two
comparisons: first of the reflectance of all the surfaces in a scene within
a certain group of wavelengths, or waveband (in Land’s term, a
“lightness record” for that waveband), and second, a comparison of thethree separate lightness records for the three wavebands (corresponding
roughly to the red, green, and blue wavelengths). This second
comparison generated the color. Land himself was at pains to avoid
specifying any particular brain site for these operations and was careful
to call his theory of color vision the Retinex theory, implying that there
might be multiple sites of interaction between the retina and the cortex.
If Land was approaching the problem of how we see colors at a
psychophysical level by asking human subjects to report how they
perceived complex, multicolored mosaics in changing illuminations,
Semir Zeki, working in London, was approaching the problem at a
physiological level, by inserting microelectrodes in the visual cortex of
anesthetized monkeys and measuring the neuronal potentials generated
when they were given colored stimuli. Early in the 1970s, he was able to
make a crucial discovery, to delineate a small area of cells on each side
of the brain, in the prestriate cortex of monkeys (areas referred to as
V4), which seemed to be specialized for responding to color (Zeki called
these “color-coding cells”).16 Thus, ninety years after Wilbrand and
Verrey had postulated a specific center for color in the brain, Zeki was
finally able to prove that such a center existed.
Fifty years earlier, the eminent neurologist Gordon Holmes, reviewing
two hundred cases of visual problems caused by gunshot wounds to the
visual cortex, had found not a single case of achromatopsia. He went on
to deny that an isolated cerebral achromatopsia could occur. The
vehemence of this denial, coming from such a great authority, played a
major part in bringing all clinical interest in the subject to an end.17
Zeki’s brilliant and undeniable demonstration startled the neurological
world, reawakening attention to a subject it had for many years
dismissed. Following his 1973 paper, new cases of human achromatopsia
began appearing in the literature once again, and these could now be
examined with new brain-imaging techniques (CAT, MRI, PET, SQUID,
etc.) not available to neurologists of an earlier era. Now, for the first
time, it was possible to visualize, in life, what areas of the brain might
be needed for human color perception. Though many of the cases
described had other problems, too (cuts in the visual field, visual
agnosia, alexia, etc.), the crucial lesions seemed to be in the medial
association cortex, in areas homologous to V4 in the monkey.18 It had
been shown in the 1960s that there were cells in the primary visualcortex of monkeys (in the area termed V1) that responded specifically to
wavelength, but not to color; Zeki now showed, in the early 1970s, that
there were other cells in the V4 areas that responded to color but not to
wavelength (these V4 cells, however, received impulses from the V1
cells, converging through an intermediate structure, V2). Thus each V4
cell received information regarding a large portion of the visual field. It
seemed that the two stages postulated by Land in his theory might now
have an anatomical and physiological grounding: lightness records for
each waveband being extracted by the wavelength-sensitive cells in V1,
but only being compared or correlated to generate color in the color-
coding cells of V4. Every one of these, indeed, seemed to act as a
Landian correlator, or a Helmholtzian “judge.”
Color vision, it seemed—like the other processes of early vision:
motion, depth, and form perception—required no prior knowledge, was
not determined by learning or experience, but was, as neurologists say, a
“bottom-up” process. Color can indeed be generated, experimentally, by
magnetic stimulation of V4, causing the “seeing” of colored rings and
halos—so-called chromatophenes.19 But color vision, in real life, is part
and parcel of our total experience, is linked with our own
categorizations and values, becomes for each of us a part of our life-
world, of us. V4 may be an ultimate generator of color, but it signals to,
it converses with, a hundred other systems in the mind-brain; and
perhaps it can also be modulated by these. It is at higher levels that
integration occurs, that color fuses with memories, expectations,
associations, and desires to make a world with resonance and meaning
for each of us.20
Mr. I. not only presented a rather “pure” case of cerebral
achromatopsia (virtually uncontaminated by additional defects in the
perception of form, motion, or depth), but was a highly intelligent and
expert witness as well, one who was skilled at drawing and reporting
what he saw. Indeed, when we first met, and he described how objects
and surfaces “fluctuated” in different lights, he was, so to speak,
describing the world in wavelengths, not in colors. The experience was
so unlike anything he had ever experienced, so strange, so anomalous,
that he could find no parallels, no metaphors, no paints or words todepict it.
When I phoned Professor Zeki to tell him of this exceptional patient,
he was greatly intrigued and wondered, in particular, how Mr. I. might
do with Mondrian testing, such as he and Land had used with normally
sighted people and with animals. He at once arranged to come to New
York to join us—Bob Wasserman, my ophthalmologist colleague; Ralph
Siegel, a neurophysiologist; and myself—in a comprehensive testing of
Jonathan I. No patient with achromatopsia had ever been examined in
this way before.
We used a Mondrian of great complexity and brilliance, illuminated
either by white light or by light filtered through narrow-band filters
allowing only long wavelengths (red), intermediate wavelengths (green),
or short wavelengths (blue) to pass. The intensity of the illuminating
beam, in every case, was the same.
Mr. I. could distinguish most of the geometric shapes, though only as
consisting of differing shades of grey, and he instantly ranked them on a
one-to-four grey scale, although he could not distinguish some color
boundaries (for example, between red and green, which both appeared
to him, in white light, as black). With rapid, random switching of the
filters, the grey-scale value of all the shapes dramatically changed—
some shades previously indistinguishable now became very different,
and all shades (except actual black) changed, either grossly or subtly,
with the wavelength of the illuminating beam. (Thus a green area would
be seen by him as white in medium-wavelength light, but as black in
white or long-wavelength light.)
All Mr. I.’s responses were consistent and immediate. (It would have
been very difficult, if not impossible, for a normally sighted person to
make these instant and invariably “correct” estimations, even with a
perfect memory and a profound knowledge of the latest color theory.)
Mr. I., it was clear, could discriminate wavelengths, but he could not go
on from this to translate the discriminated wavelengths into color; he
could not generate the cerebral or mental construct of color.
This finding not only clarified the nature of the problem, but also
served to pinpoint the location of the trouble. Mr. I.’s primary visual
cortex was essentially intact, and it was the secondary cortex
(specifically the V4 areas, or their connections) that bore virtually the
whole brunt of the damage. These areas are very small, even in man; yetall our perception of color, all our ability to imagine or remember it, all
our sense of living in a world of color, depend crucially on their
integrity. A mischance had devastated these bean-sized areas of Mr. I.’s
brain—and with this, his whole life, his life-world, had been changed.
The Mondrian testing had demonstrated damage in these areas; we
wondered now if we could see this, using brain scans. But CAT and MRI
scans were entirely normal. This could have been because the scanning
techniques of the time had a resolution inadequate to visualize what
may have been only a patchy damage to V4; it could have been that the
damage sustained was metabolic only, not structural; or it could have
been that the main damage was not in V4 itself, but in the structures
(the so-called “blobs” in V1 or the “stripes” in V2) leading up to it.21
It has been stressed—by both Zeki and Francis Crick—that these small
structures, the blobs and stripes, are intensely active metabolically and
may be unusually vulnerable to even temporary reductions of oxygen.
Crick, in particular (with whom I discussed the case in great detail),
wondered whether Mr. I. could have suffered from carbon monoxide
poisoning, which is known to cause changes in color vision through its
effects on the oxygenation of the blood to the color areas. Mr. I. might
have been exposed to carbon monoxide through a leaky exhaust in his
car, Crick speculated—perhaps due to the accident, conceivably even
causing it.22
But all this was in a sense academic. Mr. I.’s achromatopsia, after
three months, remained absolute, and he had persisting impairments of
contrast vision, too.23 Whether these would clear eventually we could
not say—some cases of acquired cerebral achromatopsia improve with
time, but others do not. We still did not know what had caused the
damage to Mr. I.’s brain, whether it was a toxin such as carbon
monoxide, or the impact of the car accident, or the result of an
impairment of blood flow to the visual areas of the brain. It was possible
that if it had been caused by a stroke, there might be more such strokes.
The prognosis had to remain uncertain, although his situation by now
seemed to be stable.
We were, however, able to offer a little practical help. Mr. I. had
consistently seen the boundaries of the Mondrian patches most clearly
when these were illuminated by medium-wavelength light, and Dr. Zeki
therefore suggested we give him a pair of green sunglasses, transmittingonly this waveband in which he saw most clearly. A pair of glasses was
specially made, and Mr. I. took to wearing them, especially in bright
sunlight. The new glasses delighted him, for although they did nothing
to restore his lost color vision, they did seem noticeably to enhance his
contrast vision and his perception of form and boundaries. He could
even enjoy color TV with his wife again. (The dark-green glasses, in
effect, rendered the color set monochromatic—though he continued to
prefer his old black-and-white set when alone.)
The sense of loss following his accident was overwhelming to
Jonathan I., as it must be to anyone who loses color, a sense that
interweaves itself in all our visual experiences and is so central in our
imagination and memory, our knowledge of the world, our culture and
art. This sense of loss, in relation to the natural world, has been
remarked upon in every case. For the nineteenth-century physician
thrown from his horse, flowers had “lost more than half their beauty,”
and entering his garden, abruptly bereft of color, was not short of
shocking. This sense of loss and of shock was doubled and redoubled for
Mr. I., for he had not only lost the beauty of the natural world, and the
world of people, and of the innumerable objects whose colors are part of
daily life, but he had also lost the world of art, he felt—the world that,
for fifty years or more, had absorbed his profoundly visual and
chromatic talents and sensibilities. The first weeks of his achromatopsia
were thus weeks of an almost suicidal depression.24
In addition to his sense of loss, Jonathan I. found his changed visual
world, at first, abhorrent and abnormal. This, too, is the experience of
most people in his position: the concussed physician thrown from his
horse found his vision “perverted,” one of Damasio’s patients found her
grey world “dirty.” Why, one must wonder, do all subjects with a
cerebral achromatopsia express themselves in such terms—why should
their experience seem so abnormal? Mr. I. was seeing with his cones,
seeing with the wavelength-sensitive cells of V1, but unable to use the
higher-order, color-generating mechanism of V4. For us, the output of
V1 is unimaginable, because it is never experienced as such and is
immediately shunted on to a higher level, where it is further processed
to yield the perception of color. Thus the raw output of V1 never appearsin awareness for us. But for Mr. I. it did—his brain damage had made
him privy to, indeed trapped him within, a strange in-between state—the
uncanny world of V1—a world of anomalous and, so to speak,
prechromatic sensation, which could not be categorized as either colored
or colorless.25
Mr. I., with his heightened visual and aesthetic sensibilities, found
these changes particularly intolerable. We know too little about what
determines emotion and aesthetic appeal in relation to color, and indeed
in relation to seeing generally—and this is a matter of individual
experience and taste.26
Color perception had been an essential part not only of Mr. I.’s visual
sense, but his aesthetic sense, his sensibility, his creative identity, an
essential part of the way he constructed his world—and now color was
gone, not only in perception, but in imagination and memory as well.
The resonances of this were very deep. At first he was intensely,
furiously conscious of what he had lost (though “conscious,” so to speak,
in the manner of an amnesiac). He would glare at an orange in a state of
rage, trying to force it to resume its true color. He would sit for hours
before his (to him) dark grey lawn, trying to see it, to imagine it, to
remember it, as green. He found himself now not only in an
impoverished world, but in an alien, incoherent, and almost nightmarish
one. He expressed this soon after his injury, better than he could in
words, in some of his early, desperate paintings.
But then, with the “apocalyptic” sunrise, and his painting of this, came
the first hint of a change, an impulse to construct the world anew, to
construct his own sensibility and identity anew. Some of this was
conscious and deliberate: retraining his eyes (and hands) to operate, as
he had in his first days as an artist. But much occurred below this level,
at a level of neural processing not directly accessible to consciousness or
control. In this sense, he started to be redefined by what had happened
to him—redefined physiologically, psychologically, aesthetically—and
with this there came a transformation of values, so that the total
otherness, the alienness of his V1 world, which at first had such a quality
of horror and nightmare, came to take on, for him, a strange fascination
and beauty.
Immediately after his accident, and for a year or more thereafter,
Jonathan I. insisted that he still “knew” colors, knew what was right,what was appropriate, what was beautiful, even if he could no longer
visualize them in his mind. But, thereafter, he became somewhat less
sure, as if now, unsupported by actual experience or image, his color
associations had started to give way. Perhaps such a forgetting—a
forgetting at once physiological and psychological, at once strategic and
structural—may have to occur, to some extent, sooner or later, in
anyone who is no longer able to experience or imagine, or in any way to
generate, a particular mode of perception. (Nor is it necessary that the
primary damage be cortical; it may occur, after months or years, even in
those who are peripherally or retinally blind.)27
There was a lessening concern with what he had lost, and indeed with
the whole subject of color, which at first had so obsessed him. Indeed, he
now spoke of being “divorced” from color. He could still speak fluently
about it, but there seemed to be a certain hollowness to his words, as if
he were drawing only from past knowledge and no longer understood it.
Nordby writes:
Although I have acquired a thorough theoretical knowledge of the physics of colours and
the physiology of the colour receptor mechanisms, nothing of this can help me to
understand the true nature of colours.28
What was true for Nordby was now true for Jonathan I., too. He had in
some ways started to resemble a person born colorblind, even though he
had lived in a color world for the first sixty-five years of his life.
At once forgetting and turning away from color, turning away from
the chromatic orientation and habits and strategies of his previous life,
Mr. I., in the second year after his injury, found that he saw best in
subdued light or twilight, and not in the full glare of day. Very bright
light tended to dazzle and temporarily blind him—another sign of
damage to his visual systems—but he found the night and nightlife
peculiarly congenial, for they seemed to be “designed,” as he once said,
“in terms of black and white.”
He started becoming a “night person,” in his own words, and took to
exploring other cities, other places, but only at night. He would drive, at
random, to Boston or Baltimore, or to small towns and villages, arriving
at dusk, and then wandering about the streets for half the night,
occasionally talking to a fellow walker, occasionally going into littlediners: “Everything in diners is different at night, at least if it has
windows. The darkness comes into the place, and no amount of light can
change it. They are transformed into night places. I love the nighttime,”
Mr. I. said. “Gradually I am becoming a night person. It’s a different
world: there’s a lot of space—you’re not hemmed in by streets, by
people.… It’s a whole new world.”
Mr. I., when he was not traveling, would get up earlier and earlier, to
work in the night, to relish the night. He felt that in the night world (as
he called it) he was the equal, or the superior, of “normal” people: “I feel
better because I know then that I’m not a freak … and I have developed
acute night vision, it’s amazing what I see—I can read license plates at
night from four blocks away. You couldn’t see it from a block away.”29
One wonders whether his night vision might, with time, have taken on
heightened function in compensation for the damage to his color system
—there might, at this stage, also have been a heightening of movement
sensitivity, perhaps of depth sensitivity, too, possibly going with an
increased dependence on and use of the intact M system.30
Most interesting of all, the sense of profound loss, and the sense of
unpleasantness and abnormality, so severe in the first months following
his head injury, seemed to disappear, or even reverse. Although Mr. I.
does not deny his loss, and at some level still mourns it, he has come to
feel that his vision has become “highly refined,” “privileged,” that he
sees a world of pure form, uncluttered by color. Subtle textures and
patterns, normally obscured for the rest of us because of their
embedding in color, now stand out for him.31 He feels he has been given
“a whole new world,” which the rest of us, distracted by color, are
insensitive to. He no longer thinks of color, pines for it, grieves its loss.
He has almost come to see his achromatopsia as a strange gift, one that
has ushered him into a new state of sensibility and being. In this his
transformation is exceedingly similar to that of John Hull, who, after
two or three years of experiencing blindness as an affliction and curse,
came to see it as “a dark, paradoxical gift,” a “concentrated human
condition … one of the orders of human being.”
Once, about three years after his injury, an intriguing suggestion was
made (by Israel Rosenfield), that Mr. I. try to regain his color vision.
Since the mechanism for comparing wavelengths was intact, and only V4
(or its equivalent) was damaged, it might be possible, at least in theory,Rosenfield thought, to “retrain” another part of the brain to perform the
requisite Landian correlations, and thus to achieve some restoration of
color vision. What was striking was Mr. I.’s response to this suggestion.
In the first months after his injury, he said, he would have embraced
such a suggestion, done everything possible to be “cured.” But now that
he conceived the world in different terms, and again found it coherent
and complete, he thought the suggestion unintelligible, and repugnant.
Now that color had lost its former associations, its sense, he could no
longer imagine what its restoration would be like. Its reintroduction
would be grossly confusing, he thought, might force a welter of
irrelevant sensations upon him, and disrupt the now-reestablished visual
order of his world. He had been for a while in a sort of limbo; now he
had settled—neurologically and psychologically—for the world of
achromatopia.
In terms of his painting, after a year or more of experiment and
uncertainty, Mr. I. has moved into a strong and productive phase, as
strong and productive as anything in his long artistic career. His black-
and-white paintings are highly successful, and people comment on his
creative renewal, the remarkable black-and-white “phase” he has moved
into. Very few of them know that his latest phase is anything other than
an expression of his artistic development, that it was brought about by a
calamitous loss.
Though it has been possible to define the primary damage in Mr. I.’s
brain—the knocking out of an essential part of his color-constructing
system—we are still totally ignorant of the “higher” changes in brain
function that must have occurred in its train. Jonathan I. did not lose
just his perception of color, but imagery, and even dreaming in color.
Finally he seemed to lose even his memory of color, so that it ceased to
be part of his mental knowledge, his mind.
Thus, as more and more time elapsed without color vision, he came to
resemble someone with an amnesia for color—or, indeed, someone who
had never known it at all. But, at the same time, a revision was
occurring, so that as his former color world and even the memory of it
became fainter and died inside him, a whole new world of seeing, of
imagination, of sensibility, was born.32There is no doubt of the reality of these changes—although it may
have required a subject as gifted and as articulate as Jonathan I. to bring
them out with such clarity. Neuroscience, at this point, can say nothing
about the cerebral basis of such “higher” changes. The physiological
investigation of color, thus far, has terminated in the color systems of
early vision, the Landian correlations that occur in V1 and V4. But V4 is
not an end point, it is only a way station, projecting in its turn to higher
and higher levels—eventually to the hippocampus, so essential for the
storage of memories; to the emotional centers of the limbic system and
amygdala; and to many other parts of the cortex. The cessation of
information flow from V4 to the memory systems of the hippocampus
and prefrontal cortex, for example, might in part explain Mr. I.’s
“forgetting” of color. We do not have the tools at the moment to map the
subtle, higher-level neural consequences of such a sensory loss, but a
history such as Jonathan I.’s shows how crucial it is to do this.
Work in the last decade has shown how plastic the cerebral cortex is,
and how the cerebral “mapping” of body image, for example, may be
drastically reorganized and revised, not only following injuries or
immobilizations, but in consequence of the special use or disuse of
individual parts. We know, for instance, that the constant use of one
finger in reading Braille leads to a huge hypertrophy of that finger’s
representation in the cortex. And with early deafness and the use of sign
language, there may be drastic remappings in the brain, large areas of
the auditory cortex being reallocated for visual processing. Similarly, it
seemed, with Mr. I.: if entire systems of representation, of meaning, had
been extinguished inside him, entirely new systems had been brought
into being.
On the ultimate question—the question of qualia: why a particular
sensation may be perceived as red—the case of Jonathan I. may not be
able to help us at all. After describing “the celebrated phaenomenon of
colours,” Newton drew back from all speculation about sensation and
would hazard no hypothesis as to “by what modes or action light
produceth in our minds the phantasms of colours.” Three centuries later,
we still have no hypothesis, and perhaps such questions can never be
answered at all.1 I asked Mr. I. later if he knew Greek or Hebrew; he said no, there was just the sense of an
unintelligible foreign language; perhaps, he added, “cuneiform” would be more accurate. He saw
forms, he knew they had to have meaning, but could not imagine what this meaning might be.
2 Similarly, a patient of Dr. Antonio Damasio, with achromatopsia from a tumor, thought
everything and everyone looked “dirty,” even finding new-fallen snow unpleasant and dirty.
3 In 1688, in Some Uncommon Observations about Vitiated Sight, Robert Boyle described a young
woman in her early twenties whose eyesight had been normal until she was eighteen, when she
developed a fever, was “tormented with blisters,” and, with this, “deprived of her sight.” When
she was presented with something red, “she look’d attentively upon it, but told me, that to her, it
did not seem Red, but of another Colour, which one would guess by her description to be a Dark
or Dirty one.” When “tufts of Silk that were finely Color’d” were given to her, she could only say
that “they seem’d to be a Light-colour, but could not tell which.” When asked whether the
meadows “did not appear to her Cloathed in Green,” she said they did not, but seemed to be “of
an odd Darkish colour,” adding that when she wished to gather violets, “she was not able to
distinguish them by the Colour from the surrounding Grass, but only by the Shape, or by feeling
them.” Boyle further observed a change in her habits, that she liked now to walk abroad in the
evenings, and this “she much delighteth to do.”
A number of accounts were published in the nineteenth century—many collected in Mary
Collins’s Colour-Blindness—one of the most vivid (besides that of an achromatopic house painter)
being that of a physician who, thrown from his horse, suffered a head injury and concussion. “On
recovering sufficiently to notice objects around him,” George Wilson recorded in 1853,
he found that his perception of colours, which was formerly normal and acute, had
become both weakened and perverted.… All coloured objects … now seem strange to him.
… Whilst formerly a student in Edinburgh he was known as an excellent anatomist; now
he cannot distinguish an artery from a vein by its tint.… Flowers have lost more than half
their beauty for him, and he recalls the shock which he received on first entering his
garden after his recovery, at finding that a favourite damask rose had become in all its
parts, petals, leaves, and stem, of one uniform dull colour; and that variegated flowers had
lost their characteristic tints.
4 One sees interesting similarities, but also differences, from the vision of those with congenital
achromatopsia. Thus Knut Nordby, a congenitally colorblind vision researcher, writes:
I only see the world in shades that colour-normals describe as black, white and grey. My
subjective spectral sensitivity is not unlike that of orthochromatic black and white film. I
experience the colour called red as a very dark grey, nearly black, even in very bright
light. On a grey-scale the blue and green colours I see as mid-greys, somewhat darkergreys if they are saturated, somewhat lighter greys when unsaturated. Yellow typically
appears to me as a rather light grey, but is usually not confused with white. Brown usually
appears as a dark grey and so does a very saturated orange.
5 Only one sense could give him any real pleasure at this time, and this was the sense of smell.
Mr. I. had always had a most acute, erotically charged sense of smell—indeed, he ran a small
perfume business on the side, compounding his own scents. As the pleasures of seeing were lost,
the pleasures of smell were heightened (or so it seemed to him), in the first grim weeks after his
accident.
6 The question of “knowing” color is very complex and has paradoxical aspects that are
difficult to dissect. Certainly Mr. I. was intensely aware of a profound loss with the change in his
vision, so clearly some sort of comparison with past experience was possible for him. Such a
comparison is not possible if there is a complete destruction of the primary visual cortex on both
sides, say from a stroke, as in Anton’s syndrome. Patients with this syndrome become totally
blind, but make no complaint or report of their blindness. They do not know they are blind; the
whole structure of consciousness is completely reorganized—instantly so—at the moment they
are stricken.
Similarly, patients with massive strokes in the right parietal cortex may lose not only the
sensation and use but the very knowledge of their left sides, of everything to the left, and indeed
of the very concept of leftness. But they are “anosognosic”—they have no knowledge of their
loss; we may say their world is bisected, but, for them, it is whole and complete.
7 One anomaly showed itself in the yarn-sorting test; he ranked bright saturated blues as “pale”
(as he had complained that the blue sky seemed almost white). But was this an anomaly? Could
we be sure that the blue wool was not, under its blueness, rather washed-out or pale? We had to
have hues that were otherwise identical—identical in brightness, saturation, reflectivity, so we
obtained a set of carefully produced color buttons known as the Farnsworth-Munsell test and
gave this to Mr. I. He was unable to put the buttons in any order, but he did separate out the
blue ones as “paler” than the rest.
8 Further testing with the Nagel anomaloscope and the Sloan achromatopsia cards confirmed
Mr. I.’s total colorblindness. With Dr. Ralph Siegel, we did tests of depth and motion perception
(using Julesz random-dot stereograms and moving random-dot fields)—these were normal, as
were tests of his ability to generate structure and depth from motion. There was, however, one
interesting anomaly: Mr. I. was unable to “get” red and green stereograms (bicolor anaglyphs),
presumably because color vision is needed to segregate the two images. We also obtained
electroretinograms, and these were quite normal, indicating that all three cone mechanisms in
the retina were intact, and that the colorblindness was indeed of cerebral origin.9 In 1877, Gladstone, in an article entitled “On the Colour Sense of Homer,” spoke of Homer’s
use of such phrases as “the wine-dark sea.” Was this just a poetic convention, or did Homer, the
Greeks, actually see the sea differently? There is indeed considerable variation between different
cultures in the way they will categorize and name colors—individuals may only “see” a color (or
make a perceptual categorization) if there is an existing cultural category or name for it. But it is
not clear whether such categorization may actually alter elementary color perception.
10 “As it is almost impossible to conceive each sensitive point of the retina to contain an
infinite number of particles, each capable of vibrating in perfect unison with every possible
undulation,” Young wrote, “it becomes necessary to suppose the number limited, for instance to
the three principal colours, red, yellow, and blue.”
The great chemist John Dalton, just five years earlier, had provided a classic description of red-
green colorblindness in himself. He thought this was due to a discoloration in the transparent
media of the eye—and, indeed, willed an eye to posterity to test this. Young, however, provided
the correct interpretation—that one of the three types of color receptor was missing. (Dalton’s
eye still resides, pickled, on a shelf in Cambridge.)
Lindsay T. Sharpe and Knut Nordby discuss this and many other aspects of the history of
colorblindness research in “Total Colorblindness: An Introduction.”
11 In 1816, the young Schopenhauer proposed a different theory of color vision, one that
envisaged not a passive, mechanical resonance of tuned particles or receptors, as Young had
postulated, but their active stimulation, competition, and inhibition—an explicit “opponens”
theory such as Ewald Hering was to create seventy years later, in apparent contradiction of the
Young-Helmholtz theory. These opponens theories were ignored at the time, and continued to be
ignored until the 1950s. We now envisage a combination of Young-Helmholtz and opponens
mechanisms: tuned receptors, which converse with one another, are continually linked in an
interactional balance. Thus integration and selection, as Schopenhauer divined, start in the
retina.
12 There is no mention of it in the great 1911 edition of Helmholtz’s Physiological Optics,
though there is a large section on retinal achromatopsia.
13 There were, however, brief mentions of achromatopsia in these intervening years, which
were ignored, or soon forgotten, for the most part. Even Kurt Goldstein, although philosophically
opposed to notions of isolated neurological deficits, remarked that he had seen several cases of
pure cerebral achromatopsia without visual field losses or other impairments—an observation
thrown off casually in the course of his 1948 book, Language and Language Disturbances.
14 A perhaps similar phenomenon is described by Knut Nordby. During his first school year, his
teacher presented the class with a printed alphabet, in which the vowels were red and the
consonants black.I could not see any difference between them and could not understand what the teacher
meant, until early one morning late in the autumn when the room-lights had been turned
on, and, unexpectedly, I saw that some of the letters, i.e. the AEIOUY ÅÄÖ, were now
suddenly a darkish grey, while the others were still solid black. This experience taught me
that colours may look different under different light-sources, and that the same colour can
be matched to different grey-tones in different kinds of illumination.
15 Maxwell’s demonstration of the “decomposition” and “reconstitution” of color in this way
made color photography possible. Huge “color cameras” were used at first, which split the
incident light into three beams and passed these through filters of the three primary colors (such
a camera, reversed, served as a chromoscope, or Maxwellian projector). Though an integral color
process was envisaged by Ducos du Hauron in the 1860s, it was not until 1907 that such a
process (Autochrome) was actually developed, by the Lumière brothers. They used tiny starch
grains dyed red, green, and violet, in contact with the photographic emulsion—these acted as a
sort of Maxwellian grid through which the three color-separation images, mosaicked together,
could both be taken and viewed. (Color cameras, Lumièrecolor, Dufaycolor, Finlaycolor, and
many other additive color processes were still being used in the 1940s, when I was a boy, and
stimulated my own first interest in the nature of color.)
16 He was also able to find cells, in an adjacent area, that seemed to respond solely to
movement. A remarkable account and analysis of a patient with a pure “motion blindness” was
given by Zihl, Von Cramon, and Mai in 1983. The patient’s problems are described as follows:
The visual disorder complained of by the patient was a loss of movement vision in all
three dimensions. She had difficulty, for example, in pouring tea or coffee into a cup
because the fluid appeared to be frozen, like a glacier. In addition, she could not stop
pouring at the right time since she was unable to perceive the movement in the cup (or a
pot) when the fluid rose. Furthermore the patient complained of difficulties in following a
dialogue because she could not see the movement of the face and, especially, the mouth of
the speaker. In a room where more than two other people were walking, she felt very
insecure and unwell, and usually left the room immediately, because “people were
suddenly here or there but I have not seen them moving.” The patient experienced the
same problem but to an even more marked extent in crowded streets or places, which she
therefore avoided as much as possible. She could not cross the street because of her
inability to judge the speed of a car, but she could identify the car itself without difficulty.
“When I’m looking at the car first, it seems far away. But then, when I want to cross the
road, suddenly the car is very near.” She gradually learned to “estimate” the distance of
moving vehicles by means of the sound becoming louder.17 A vivid account of Holmes’s negative influence has been provided by Damasio, who also
points out that all of Holmes’s cases involved lesions in the dorsal aspect of the occipital lobe,
whereas the center for achromatopsia lies on the ventral aspect.
18 The work of Antonio and Hanna Damasio and their colleagues at the University of Iowa was
particularly important here, both by virtue of the minuteness of the perceptual testing, and the
refinement of the neuroimaging they used.
19 Such chromatophenes may occur spontaneously in visual migraines, and Mr. I. himself had
experienced these, on occasion, in migraines occurring before his accident. One wonders what
would have been experienced if Mr. I.’s V4 areas had been stimulated—but magnetic stimulation
of circumscribed brain areas was not technically possible at the time. One wonders, too, now that
such stimulation is possible, whether it might be tried in individuals with congenital (retinal)
achromatopsia (several such achromatopes have expressed their curiosity about such an
experiment). It is possible—I am not aware of any studies on this—that V4 fails to develop in
such people, with the absence of any cone input. But if V4 is present as a functional (though
never functioning) unit despite the absence of cones, its stimulation might produce an astounding
phenomenon—a burst of unprecedented, totally novel sensation, in a brain/mind that had never
had a chance to experience or categorize such sensation. Hume wonders if a man could imagine,
could even perceive, a color he had never seen before—perhaps this Humean question
(propounded in 1738) could find an answer now.
20 The power of expectation and mental set in the perception of color is clearly shown in those
with partial red-green colorblindness. Such people may not, for example, be able to spot scarlet
holly berries against the dark green foliage, or the delicate salmon-pink of dawn—until these are
pointed out to them. “Our poor impoverished cone cells,” says a dyschromatope of my
acquaintance, “need the amplification of intellect, knowledge, expectation, and attention in order
to ‘see’ the colors that we are normally ‘blind’ to.”
21 Malfunction in V4 can be shown by a newer technique, PET scanning (which pictures the
metabolic activity of different brain areas), even if no anatomical lesion is visible on CAT or MRI
scans. Unfortunately, this was not available to us at the time.
22 Mr. I., fond of spending time in sports clubs and bars, did some research here himself and
told us that he had spoken to a number of boxers who had had transient, and sometimes
persistent, losses of color vision following blows to the head. Partial or total achromatopsia
(“greying-out”), also temporary, is characteristic of fainting or shock, in which there is a
reduction of blood supply to the posterior, and especially the visual parts, of the brain. Greying-
out also occurs in transient ischemic attacks, due to arterial insufficiency—Zeki speculates that
this affects the wavelength-selective cells in the blobs of V1 and the thin stripes of V2. Transient
alterations of color vision—including bizarre instabilities or transformations of color(dyschromatopsia)—may also occur in visual migraines and epilepsies and are well known to
users of mescaline and other drugs. They can be a disquieting side effect of ibuprofen.
23 It was never quite clear from Mr. I.’s descriptions of daily life whether or not he had some
slight impairment of form vision. But, interestingly, when he was being tested on the Mondrians,
boundaries between rectangles tended to disappear with prolonged fixation, though they would
be rapidly restored if the stimulus was moved. There are two other systems besides the blob
system in early visual processing: the M system, which deals with movement and depth
perception particularly, but not color; and a P-interblob system, which probably deals with high-
resolution form perception. Zeki thought that the dissolution of boundaries with prolonged
fixation suggested a defect in the P system, and their rapid restoration with movement “a healthy
and active M system.”
24 This sense of loss is not, of course, experienced by those born totally colorblind. This is
brought out in another letter I received recently from a charming and intelligent woman, Frances
Futterman, born totally colorblind. She contrasted her own situation with that of Jonathan I.:
I was struck by how different that kind of experience must be, compared to my own
experience of never having seen color before, thus never having lost it—and also never
having been depressed about my colorless world.… The way I see in and of itself is not
depressing. In fact, I am frequently overwhelmed by the beauty of the natural world.…
People say I must see in shades of gray or in “black and white,” but I don’t think so. The
word gray has no more meaning for me than the word pink or blue—in fact, even less
meaning, because I have developed inner concepts of color words like pink and blue; but,
for the life of me, I can’t conceive of gray.
Though Mrs. Futterman’s experience is certainly different from Mr. I.’s, both remark on the
meaninglessness of the word “grey,” a word that can no more convey anything to the
achromatopic than can “darkness” to the blind, or “silence” to the deaf. Mrs. Futterman remarks,
as Mr. I. came to, on the beauty of her world. “I would also be willing to bet,” she says, “that if
we were tested along with normals in low lighting levels, we would be able to detect far more
shades of gray. Black and white photos look far too stark to me. The world I see has so much
more richness and variety than black-and-white photos or TV shows.… My vision is a lot richer
than normals can imagine.”
25 We may experience something like this, Zeki has recently shown, by using an inhibitory
magnetic stimulation to V4, which produces a temporary achromatopsia.
26 We also know too little about the interactions of the three major systems in early vision—
the M, interblob, and blob systems. But Crick wonders whether some of the unpleasantness and
abnormality, at least—the “leaden” vision of which Mr. I. complained—might not in part be dueto the unmoderated action of the preserved M system, which, he emphasizes, “sees few shades of
grey, [so that] its white would correspond to what was (in normal people) a dirty white.” This
notion gains support from the fact that people with congenital achromatopsia, who have not
sustained any damage to their higher visual systems, do not have any such perceptual
abnormalities. Thus Knut Nordby writes: “I have never experienced ‘dirty,’ ‘impure,’ ‘stained,’ or
‘washed-out’ colors, as reported by the artist Jonathan I.”
27 J. D. Mollon et al. describe the case of a young police cadet who, following a severe febrile
illness (probably cerebral herpes) was left with achromatopsia, hemianopia, and some agnosia
and amnesia. Testing him five years after the illness, Mollon reports that “he was able to name
(presumably by means of verbal memory) the colours of e.g., grass, traffic lights, and the union
jack, but made errors on other common objects (e.g., banana, pillar-box).” Thus here, after five
years of total colorblindness, the colors of even the most familiar objects were often forgotten.
Such effects have been recorded in ordinary retinal blindness, too, where after some years there
may be a widespread loss of all visual memories, including those of color.
28 “A very intelligent blind person,” Schopenhauer writes, “could almost [construct] a theory
of colours from accurate statements that he heard about them.” Diderot, similarly, speaking of
Nicholas Saunderson, a famous blind lecturer on optics at Oxford in the early eighteenth century,
feels that he had a profound theoretical knowledge and concept of space, although he never had
any direct visual percept of it. (See footnote 13.)
29 With his revulsion from color and brightness, his fondness of dusk and night, his apparently
enhanced vision at dusk and night, Mr. I. sounds like Kaspar Hauser, the boy who was confined
in a dimly lit cellar for fifteen years, as Anselm von Feuerbach described him in 1832:
As to his sight, there existed, in respect to him, no twilight, no night, no darkness.… At
night he stepped everywhere with the greatest confidence; and in dark places, he always
refused a light when it was offered to him. He often looked with astonishment, or laughed,
at persons who, in dark places, for instance, when entering a house, or walking on a
staircase by night, sought safety in groping their way, or in laying hold on adjacent
objects. In twilight, he even saw much better than in broad daylight. Thus, after sunset, he
once read the number of a house at a distance of one hundred and eighty paces, which, in
daylight, he would not have been able to distinguish so far off. Towards the close of
twilight, he once pointed out to his instructor a gnat that was hanging in a very distant
spider’s web. (pp. 83–4)
30 It may be that individuals with congenital achromatopsia develop heightened function of
the M system, and may be extraordinarily adept at spotting movement. This is currently being
investigated by Ralph Siegel and Martin Gizzi.31 I recently heard of an achromatopic botanist in England said to be even better than color
normals at swiftly identifying ferns and other plants in woods, hedgerows, and other almost
monochromatic environments. Similarly, in World War II, people with severe red-green
colorblindness were pressed into service as bombardiers, because of their ability to “see through”
colored camouflage and not be distracted by what would be, to the normally sighted, a confusing
and deceiving configuration of colors. One veteran of the Pacific theater reports that colorblind
soldiers were indispensable in spotting the movement of camouflaged troops in the jungle. (All of
these things may also be clearer to color normals at twilight.)
32 A similar emergence of new sensibilities and imagination is described in H. G. Wells’s great
short story “The Country of the Blind”: “For fourteen generations these people have been blind
and cut off from all the seeing world; the names for all the things of sight had faded and
changed.… Much of their imagination had shrivelled with their eyes, and they had made for
themselves new imaginations with their ever more sensitive ears and fingertips.”